1.1 Overview / Introduction about inversion models
[defn of inversion model]
[what they do, why they came about].
[how do they output the uptake timeseries used in the project?]



1.2 Description of each inversion model
- Each inversion model has been run in different time periods as shown [in the table] below:
(Table)
Rayner: 1992-2012
JAMSTEC: 1996-2017
CTRACKER: 2000-2017
CAMS: 1979-2017
JENA_s76: 1976-2017
JENA_s85: 1985-2017
[any other differences, which might include things like how they were run, if anything cuased the output of one model to be different from the others etc.]



1.3 Model evaluation against observations (GCP)
1.3.1 Uptake timeseries against GCP
(Figures 5a & 5b)
- Timeseries from all of the six inversion models show good agreement in the mean and trend against the GCP (details in 1.4.1) [perhaps reverse roles of these subsections].

1.3.2 Regression of timeseries against GCP
- When regressing the modelled timeseries against the GCP timeseries, results are different between the land and ocean counterparts.
R values:
- Land: mean = 0.905, std = 0.048
- Ocean: mean = 0.567, std = 0.176
The land timeseries seem to correlate well with the GCP timeseries as shown by the high average and very low std.
The ocean, however, is much poorer at moderate stregth on average and a much high std.
This shows that we can trust the inversion models for the land counterparts of uptake when completing analyses, but not so much for the oceanic counterparts.
- For land, CTRACKER is the worst correlated against GCP and well away from the other 5 models, but still strong.
- For ocean, CTRACKER is the second worst correlated while Rayner's model is the worst. Both are under 0.4 and are therefore considered poorly correlated.
CAMS is the best correlated with a relatively strong correlation at 0.797.

- [just a comment here] Overall, the best model seems to be CAMS and the worst seems to be CTRACKER.
It is worth noting that CTACKER has the shortest duration, while CAMS is the second longest.
The longer the duration of the period covered, the more correlated it will tend to be as there is more data to cover the picture of how the models compare to observations.

- [it must be noted that the inversion models use observations, whether that is GCP or not, to produce the output, so is comparing these models to observations a good idea?]

1.3.3 Comparing the overall trend of timeseries against GCP
- There is, on average, about a 20% difference in the long-term (whole period) trend of the modelled timeseries against the GCP.
The majority of the difference in trends is positive (over negataive differences).
The std for land is about double of the std for ocean, suggesting that there is a noticeable difference in spread between land and ocean.
Overall, it seems the long-term trend in uptake as observed from the GCP is covered well in the inversion models, but not perfectly.
This is simply an appeal to be aware of the differences when conducting analyses.


1.4 Results
1.4.1 Uptake timeseries
(Figures 6a & 6b)
- Timeseries from all of the six inversion models show good agreement in the mean and the trend.
This is with the exception of the ocean uptake from Rayner's model, where the mean is shifted upwards from the five models, however the trend is still consistent.
This is being investigated by the [author?].


1.4.2 Rolling gradient
1.4.2.1 Original timeseries
- Between the six models, there are mixed results about the overall long-term trend of the rolling gradient.
Some models are showing acceleration of uptake (-ve trend) for ocean and deceleration (+ve trend) for land, but some are showing the opposite.
No models [check all to be sure] show the same sign.
[Check this to be sure] All models have rolling gradients that trend significantly over the long run (with tests showing p<0.05).
This is evidence to show that uptake is indeed changing over decadal timescales beyond the first order (i.e. there is acceleration).
However, the opposite signs of land and ocean for each model means that they could cancel each other out.
The magnitude is far greater for land over ocean for most [or all] of the models, however, the overall weights should be investigated further.

1.4.2.2 With bandpass applied


1.4.3 Spectral Analysis and significance
1.4.3.1 Power Spectrums of monthly uptake after deseasonalisation
- There are spikes at 1 year and 4 year periods.
This could be related to temperature. A comparison of the power spectrum of uptake to global monthly temperature can help to verify this.
- [What are the long-term periods showing?]
- [Show AR1 process to see which frequencies/periods are statistically signficant (over the 95% confidence interval).
Also don't forget how much frequencies go outside the interval, as there is a considerably high chance that at least one will go outside].

1.4.3.2 Comparison with global monthly temperature
- The power spectral density (psd) of the land uptake timeseries from the inversion model and the global monthly land temperature (HadCRUT) can be compared.
- There are common periods of significance (where there is power or "spikes") at around the 1 and 4 year periods.
- 4 year period: This can be explained by the influence of ENSO on temperature, which in turn is affecting uptake [confirm this, plus will need more elobaration/evidence].
Could this show how temperature is affecting uptake and on interannual scales [there are many papers showing this, just refer to them for evidence and elobaration].
- 1 year period: this is clearly the visualisation of the seasonal cycle.
Could simply be that the sun's seasonal cycle is affecting both temperature and uptake in the same way but independently [not confirmed, some papers might confirm this].
