[Refer to GCP 2019 (or 2018) for full details about GCP. Sections 1.1 and 1.2 provide a brief description that are to be included in the thesis.]
[Rayner believes that most of the GCP results are final, so writing results here will likely be included in the thesis without too much change b/w now and submission.]

Global Carbon Budget 2019: Friedlingstein2019
Global Carbon Budget 2018: LeQuere2018



1.1 Overview / Introduction about the Global Carbon Project
The Global Carbon Project (GCP) is a project with an aim to provide two of the following:
- global carbon budget estimates, including fossil fuel emissions, land use change emissions, land and ocean uptake, atmospheric growth and the budget imbalance.
- a detailed description of the data sets and methodology used to compute the global carbon budget estimates for the industrial period, from 1750 to 2018, and in more detail since 1959.

The GCP releases a paper every year with updates of the budget estimates.



1.2 Description and history of fluxes
The observations of carbon uptake in this study will be the GCP's carbon budget estimates from 1959 to 2018 (or 2017).
Until recently, the GCP estimated annual land carbon sinks by taking the residual of the carbon budget of annual carbon fluxes, and treated it as observations.
The GCP then changed its method of estimation by using an ensemble of Dynamical Global Vegetation Models (DGVMs) and classifying the residual of the budget as the imbalance of the budget.
The land residual flux can still be estimated by simply adding the DGVM estimate of the flux to the budget imbalance.
The land residual flux will be used in this study as it is classified as observations.



1.3 Results
The land and ocean carbon uptake fluxes from 1959 to 2018 has been analysed as a timeseries.
Results from various analyses are shown below.


1.3.1 Uptake timeseries
(Figure 1)
Figure shows annual land and ocean carbon fluxes from 1959 to 2017 (change this to 2018).
NOTE: Plots show carbon flux directed positive to the atmosphere, meaning that negative values indicate either a net positive sink or a positive uptake, and vice versa.

- GCP data of land and ocean carbon fluxes shows a persisent increase from 1959 to 2017 on long-term scales, despite large interannual variability.
This is expected because of the CO2 fertilisation effect, which is a dominant contributor of the behaviour of changes in carbon uptake, and the CO2 concentration levels have been increasing steadily.

- Land carbon uptake displays large interannual variability (which can be quantified by conducting spectral analysis on the GCP timeseries, see section 1.3.3).
The oceanic carbon uptake displays much less variability on interannual timescales.
This is expected because vegetation is highly influenced by interannual climate variability, mainly ENSO. Oceanic uptake is not influenced by climate variability, at least on the same scale as land uptake.
[Try "regressing" land and oceanic carbon uptake timeseries to see how correlated they are. Are they similar or are they influenced by separate contributors?]

- What is important in looking at both the land and oceanic carbon uptake timeseries is the long-term change, rather than the interannual variability.
This is despite interannual variability playing a significant part in behaviour of carbon uptake.

(Figures 2a, 2b)
Figure shows annual land and carbon uptake fluxes against corresponding annual CO2 concentrations.

- CO2 concentrations axis is similar to time axis, noteably in that CO2 concentrations has always increased in the years 1959 to 2017.
The only difference is that the increase is not by 1 unit but dilated higher. This stretches the uptake timeseries along the x axis.

- Once again, the land flux shows large variability compared to oceanic flux.

- R values are given and shown in Figure.
The high r value for the ocean flux provides strong evidence that carbon uptake is indeed increasing over the last 60 years at a rate that is clearly consistent.
It also shows that the interannual variability (or just variability) seen in land is not displayed in the ocean.
The ocean flux could be used for many applications where the interannual variability would impede on the analysis and where it is not important where the uptake analysed should come from (land or ocean).
The land flux has a weaker r value, but not weak (moderate). It is obvious that the interannual variability is the cause of this. The lower uncertainity associated with the ocean uptake means that we know that the land uptake is increasing steadily, despite containing the variability.

- Since the r values represent the correlation between uptake and CO2 concentrations, it shows that there is a clear positive relationship between the two i.e. uptake is increasing with the increase in CO2 concentrations.
There must still be a physical mechanism to explain the relationship. This is simply the CO2 fertilisation effect, which is a dominant influence on uptake.


1.3.2 Rolling gradient
(Figures 3a, 3b)
Figures show the timeseries of the 10-Year Trend of carbon uptake from 1959-2008, both land (3a) and ocean (3b), as well as the slope of the trend over the whole period with values of the gradient and its r value.
With each figure there is also a plot of the carbon uptake timeseries from 1959-2018.

NOTE: Rolling gradient is probably a little informal for thesis, consider a more clear but concise phrase.

- The slopes of both land and ocean are quite low [there is no test for statistical significance yet, it should be completed].
The r values are also quite low for both (although higher for ocean) [should also obtain p values once we understand how to interpret them.]
This could indicate that the acceleration of carbon uptake over the last 60 years is quite low [it is very important, however, that the values of the slopes are compared towards some sort of benchmark e.g. how much carbon saved/lost if this accerelation never existed and the trend of carbon uptake was simply linear throughout the whole period?]

- Of more importance is whether the trend of the slope (which is the acceleration of the carbon uptake throughout the whole period 1959-2018) is positive or negative.
For land, acceleration is positive (negative in plot, meaning +ve acc in uptake), suggesting that, over the long-run, terrestrial uptake is growing faster.
For ocean, acceleration is negative, suggesting that, over the long run, oceanic uptake is growing slowly and heading towards decay.

- Discussion:
Knowing that the processes that influence carbon uptake are summarised by a main positive and main negative feedback, the acceleration of uptake over a long period could be an indicator [confirm this later then form a stronger argument] of the feedback that is overpowering the other.
For land, the +ve feedback is the CO2 fertilisation effect, -ve feedback is climate (temperature rise) on respiration and photosynthesis (possibly, noting that there quite a bit of uncertainty with the feedbacks over land).
Since land uptake is accelerating, this should suggest that the CO2 fetilisation effect is "winning" over the climate feedback. However, the r value (and therefore the uncertainty) also suggests that there is a lot of play that we do not fully understand. Plus there could just be a lot of variability (mainly interannual).
For ocean, the feedbacks are more well known.
+ve feedback is increasing CO2 on ocean gas exchange, and -ve feedback is rising temperatures on oceanic gas exchange.
The decelerating uptake suggests that the ocean gas exchange is being affected more by the effect of rising temperatures than the effect of increasing CO2 concentrations.
Since the ocean is less variable, it could tell us that on long-term scales (where interannual variabilty isn't at play, even for land) the effect of rising temperatures will have an overpowering effect over the increase in CO2 concentrations.
For shorter (interannual) timescales, there could be more at play that means the CO2 fertilisation effect wins [Be good to look at ENSO for interannual variability].
[Would also be good to compare uptake (and its acceleration) to temperatures on interannual and multidecadal scales and see which feedback is more powerful, this requires the mining of temperature observation datasets.]

- With help of the spectral analysis, we can pick the best window size for land and ocean. [needs more verification/discussion].
Land: 20 years, Ocean: 10 years.
With land's 20 year window, the r value is much higher than the 10 year window, meaning that this window is better to use.
The trend is still negative, suggesting furthermore that land is being influenced by the CO2 fertilsation effect over the effect of the climate.


1.3.3 Spectral Analysis and significance
[20/12 - Analysis is not final so any figures are therefore also not final.]

- Spectral analysis on GCP uptake data can help identify the most powerful timescales beyond one year.
A major problem here is that GCP data only has annual resolution available, and not monthly.
This means that there is much less data to conduct this analysis. Unfortunately, it seems that the size of the data does not present robust results out of this analysis to block out the noise.
This is mainly because we expect powerful frequencies at the end of the spectrum (1 year).
To have monthly data means that the noise can be "presented" in the monthly data and away from the seasonal and interannual timescales where uptake is expected to have lots of spectral variance.
Therefore the inversion model outputs are best used here, knowing that they'll can only be validated by evaluation against GCP data.

- Nevertheless, there are figures to show the power spectrum of the GCP data.
(Figures 4a, 4b)
Figures 4a and 4b present the power spectrum (using Welch's method - meaning that this is an approximation) of land (4a) and oceanic (4b) uptake over the last 60 years.

- Land has more variance throughout the frequency spectrum than ocean.

- On timescales longer than 10 years, it is shown that oceanic uptake has more spectral variance than on timescales shorter than 10 years but this does not apply to land, which displays power in periods less than 10 years and also a lot of noise.
There is still lots of power on timescales more than 10 years nevertheless [more will need to be done in analysing the contributions behind the frequencies and their variance, mainly detecting and verifying.]

- It is possible that we can use the power spectrum to pick the best window size for the rolling gradient based on local maxima of power along periods of more than 10 years.
It seems that 20 years is a good choice for land (would be better than the standard 10 years).
The 20 year period could be a signal of a multidecadal climate driver [it would be good to take HadCRUT temperature data and do spectral analyses on those, and compare that to uptake (as well as timeseries)].
Interestingly, the power in 20 year period is higher than in the whole period. This could simply the distribution of power to the interannual timescales instead.
What it definitely shows is that the long-term trend is not so clear for land becuase of the variability associated with much shorter timescales. 20 years could be the best "long" timescale.
Ocean has highest power in 60 year period -> more certainty about its long-term trend.
10 years might be the best choice for ocean given its clear local maxima at that period.

- Doing the rolling gradient for 20 year windows on land gives a much higher r value than for 10 years, showing that the spectral analysis is indeed helpful for the rolling gradient analysis.
- Both land and ocean have high power in the around 3-4 year period, which would likely be the signal from ENSO.
